Robert Bauval has his feet in two worlds:
in the west in the modern work of academia, and in Egypt,
where he has spent nearly half of his fascinating life.
Robert's work on the dating of the Sphinx
has been featured in a number of documentaries
and news programs, shocking the world with his findings
as to its truer age, which may reach back
to 11,500 BC or even more.
But his passion is in understanding the connection
between the cosmos and this mystical site
for a deeper understanding of what the ancients knew
to be mankind's destiny.
To share this knowledge, he takes city dwellers
to Egypt to, among other things, witness the desert sunrise.
(somber string music)
One of the comments you made
in your talk a little while ago
was about the fact that modern man
has completely forgotten about
at least 50% of our environment,
which is what is above our heads.
We've become completely disconnected from
that sense of continuity and also the patterns
of civilizations rising and falling and so forth.
So, I wanted to jump in at that point
and talk about where we--
first of all, why this is not a good thing to have forgotten
and then where we were with your work,
some of the societies, some of the newest work
you've done in Sirius Rising, and then
start taking the conversation forward to now.
First of all, what's up with our having forgotten
everything above our heads and our connection to it?
I think perhaps the term "forgotten"
is not quite accurate.
We today, I mean us living human beings,
have to be caught in a time frame,
which is the 20th and 21st century.
We process within that culture.
We believe that we are
living in the reality
that is our reality, whereas in fact,
we could have been born at any time.
We could have been born at the time
of the ancient Egyptians,
we could have been born in prehistoric times,
or we could be born in the future.
We respond to and we process within our own time frame.
The question is, which is the right response?
How are we supposed to behave,
and what are we supposed to do on this planet?
Why this planet?
We could even argue that not only we're born
in a certain time frame, but we're born in specific place.
We could have been born somewhere entirely different.
We're here for presumably a reason.
The way I see it is that
we're on this planet to understand
its role in the cosmic family.
For all we know, and this is
perhaps the most exciting thing,
for all we know, we're the only
conscious entity in this cosmos,
which I believe we're not,
but for all we know we might be,
and we have a tremendous responsibility.
We are matter become conscious.
We are conscious stars, if you like.
We come from the stars, it's a physical reality,
and we've become conscious.
What do we do with this consciousness?
Do we restrain it, and live within
the cultural ethos that we exist?
Or do we step out of it and realign ourselves
with the true purpose of our existence here?
The question is, what is this?
I think the first thing that I feel,
that we all ought to do, is to attempt to reconnect.
For example, I take tours in Egypt
as a side line to my writing,
and something very odd happens.
I get people from all over walks of life,
accountants, bankers,
searchers, teachers, from everywhere.
What strikes me is that as I take them around Egypt--
Egypt has a wonderful context--is that
much of its population live in
what we would call a primitive condition.
I mean if you travel around outside Cairo,
you find people living in a manner
that has been unchanged for thousands of years.
Very close to the--
And you were born in Egypt
You know Egypt well.
I was born in Egypt, yes.
You have a foot in both worlds.
Yes, well I suppose I have the advantage of having lived--
I'm 60 years old, and I've lived
literally half my life in the west
and half my life in the east, and particularly Egypt.
Collectively, I've spent 35 years in Egypt.
In Egypt, especially if you live outside the cities,
you are constantly
integrated in the activity of nature.
You rise with sunrise, you see the sunset.
Particularly the neurotic people,
you're very conscious of, for example, directions.
Nine floors from north to south.
It's inbred in you; you know where
North is, East is, and West is.
You know where the sun will rise.
You know where it will set.
You know which stars are going to appear.
You're literally exposed
to the natural context around you.
Now when I find these people who come over,
as amazing as it may sound, city people--
I get a lot of them from London, from Rome--
some of them, as odd as it may seem,
have never seen the sun rise.
Now that is amazing.
What happens once we tour, and I take them gently around
a place I take them very often
to experience this is an oasis.
An oasis is something very special
because it's a kind of microcosm,
it's a little world.
There is one particular which there is of Siwa
which has a very special temple,
it's the oracle temple of Alexander the Great.
It was a very, very important
spiritual place in ancient times.
Alexander the Great went there
to check his divinity, for example.
The temple still exists; it's on a mound.
As you go on that mound, you literally see
the world in a miniature form.
The oasis is circular, you see its limits,
you know the directions, you're very, very
aware of the environment you're in.
And I take them there an hour or so before dawn,
and I sit them on the mound,
and tell them to wait for sunrise.
We had to stop down
because it's so cold you had to put your jacket on.
Yeah, I'm freezing.
Okay, let's pick up with that.
Well, as they sit there and do what they think
is normal to do, they chit-chat among each other
and speak about what they're going to have
for lunch or whatever,
and then I stop them, abruptly.
"Could you all keep quiet?"
They listen to me.
And I said, "Just listen, listen what's gonna happen
"and just feel what's gonna happen."
And what happens there, and happens in similar conditions,
is that, you can feel it, there's a shift.
The palm trees begin to rustle.
Certain creatures begin to make noises.
We hear the cockerel
chanting, donkeys begin to bray.
It's as if they're responding to the change.
They're actually, what I call,
speaking the silent language of nature.
They're talking to each other.
Falcons appear, and at the moment of sunrise,
there's a kind of natural orchestra.
You hear the braying, and the cockerel singing,
and falcons getting excited.
And what falcons do at dawn,
they literally fly against the sun.
Oh, is that right?
They literally fly against it,
and they open their wings,
as if greeting, speaking to the sun.
Some animals do not exist there anymore,
but for example, when there were baboons,
Egyptians were very reverent to the baboons.
Why?
Because they start chattering when the sun rise,
and they rush to the riverside, to the Nile,
and they raise their hands by the falcons,
and they seem to be speaking some language,
which to me is the language of nature.
We can speak it, too, if we try.
What we call literate man
has only been literate man for the last 6-7,000 years.
For millions, perhaps billions, of years,
we spoke the language of nature.
We understood the subtleties of nature.
We could sense what animals
were saying, in a sense.
It's a language that is silent.
It's very strange, and very, very inspiring
to see human beings who are still in this context
The Bedouin, for example, in the desert, he'll sense,
he'll tell you there's a falcon
behind a tree, he senses it.
I did a lot of trapping when I was a young kid in Egypt,
and I learned from the Bedouins,
they walk in the desert and tell you, "Dig here.
"You're going to find a certain cockroach
"which you can use as bait," and you find it.
What is it that gets them to that?
It's this--
-[Woman] You made
a comment, in fact, that I was intrigued with,
that fits perfectly right in this part.
What you were saying, the Einsteins
and the Newtons and such of our known history
have always been, that genius has always existed,
but before we had the scientific method
in modern times and technology,
it was applied to the internal technologies, as it were.
And we come to this term that I call magic.
I don't mean pulling rabbits out of hats
and things like that.
No,
real magic.
The magic of once you understand
and study and observe nature around you,
and I really mean in a very intense way.
For example, a neophyte of the temples in Egypt
will be given a task.
You're going to study the hieroglyph
that is a bird
or a crocodile or a falcon.
Now, we want you to go out there
and observe that creature.
Don't come back until you know everything it does.
How it eats, how it sleeps, how it
hunts, how it behaves with other creatues,
how it multiplies.
Everything, everything that you can know,
so that when you know it, you know
to its depth either
this creature or this thing or the sun or the stars
or whatever is being studied, by observation.
We have all the capacity to observe
not just with our eyes, but with our senses,
to feel, to touch, so that we know everything.
How it feels, how it smells,
and then we can say we know this thing.
I know it.
That's knowledge.
Well, that is knowledge that will become magic
because when you know the thing,
then when you speak of the thing,
you're speaking what the Egyptians call the words of power.
When you say the words of the thing or the creature
that you have studied, then you utter it
with such power that others can
get the full depth of the message.
To me, that is
social man, conscious man
living in full harmony with his environment.
Then we become something else.
We become literally, we expose
and exploit our magical capacities.
What I mean by that is that
we forget that we are the product
of billions of years of evolution
on this planet alone, let alone the billions of years
before this planet was formed.
We are the fruit,
we're a magical creation.
And yet, we're not using these capacities.
But the evidence is
that we, once upon a time, have used these capacities
in the past.
We have them.
The question is that we're caught in a time frame
that does not demand us to use them.
There is a wonderful story, for example of,
again, this Hermetic text of the gods of wisdom
represented by Hermes, thought to the ancient Egyptians,
who comes to Pharaoh and says,
"I brought another gift for you.
"I brought the gift of astronomy
"and the knowledge of the stars,
"and the knowledge of architecture,
"and husbandry and agriculture,
"but I've got something really good for you now."
And he says, "What is it?"
And he says, "Well, I brought you the knowledge of writing."
And the king says, "What is it?"
And he says, "Well, let me show you,"
and takes a pallet and says, "Say something"
and scribbles it down in hieroglyphic language
and says, "Your words are here."
He says, "How?"
He says, "Well, I'll tell them.
"It says what you says, no?
"And I'll bring my assistant,
"and he'll tell you exactly the same thing.
"I mean this is fantastic;
we can record what you say,
"and we can record what you do,
"and we can record anything we want."
And he expects the king to say, "Wow! This is the best."
And the king says,
"God of wisdom, thank you
"for all the gifts you brought me,
"but I'm not sure about this one.
"I don't think I want that."
And he says, "Why? Why?"
And he says, "Because men will lose
"their ability to memorize.
"The greatest gift that our creator's given us is memory."
Memory, we hold inside everything we see,
everything we sense, and if we externalize it,
they won't use that capacity.
We have a wonderful
brain that stores,
I mean, as I'm looking at you now,
I'm not just recording what I see,
but I'm recording the wind,
the temperature, the hues.
Thousands of effects and sensations are being in me.
And as they're stored in there,
and I learn how to externalize them,
bring them back to surface,
not only I can remember properly, not just by reading.
I remember and bring back the event
in my mind, but with other memories
as they integrate and react with each other.
They create unique ideas. They create.
Without using that capacity, men will become lazy.
So the king was a wise man?
The king was wiser than the god of wisdom.
Unfortunately, we did take writing.
If you really think about it, we're now at the stage
where even writing has become archaic.
We discharge all our capacities of memory
and even our thinking into
even much more powerful memory devices:
computers, cell phones.
But in this process,
we have cut ourselves off,
to a tragic degree, from life.
From each other, from nature.
Well, we're not choosing
our capacities, we are capable
of understanding nature through our senses.
What is the net effect of this,
as you see it?
The effect is
that we're detaching ourselves from nature,
which is a very dangerous thing.
The more we detach ourselves, the less respect
we have for it, the less respect we have for others,
and we isolate ourselves.
We might as well not be on this planet.
I mean, there are some people living on this planet
who are so detached from it,
living in ghettos and apartments.
There are kids who have never seen cows.
There are kids who have never seen
the stars because light pollution.
There are people who never witness
a sunrise or a sunset like we were saying,
have no idea how the stars move.
They're detached from their environment.
They're detached from the place
which we are meant to be to understand it
and know what we're here for.
We're drifting; you might as well take me,
or me, because I'm reconnecting,
but you may as well take some human beings
and place them on different parts of the cosmos,
and it wouldn't make a difference.
And yet, they're here for a reason.
You've spent your life
trying to decipher, for example,
the alignments of the great edifices, the Great Pyramid,
against constellations, and you're renowned
for the work you've done for original thinking,
for almost heresy in some circles
because you go against traditional, historical
belief systems about Egypt and the cultures.
And really, it's feeling to me like what's driving you
is this desire to help people understand
there are cycles of knowledge that have been
and have been set aside and lost,
and we have to regain them.
Is this correct?
The way I see ancient Egypt, I see it as a model,
as the best model that we have available.
We've tried models, we've tried monarchies,
we've tried dictatorships, we've tried socialism,
we've tried democracy, and they're not working.
We need a model that works, and the model that works
is a culture that has
developed it's social, cultural behavior with nature.
The Egyptians were acutely aware
of their natural environments.
They lived in accordance with the cycles of nature.
Including the cosmos.
More particularly because they believed
that what was happening above was
affecting their existence below.
Which is correct.
It would guide them,
as one talk with your newest work.
In the cattle people, it would guide them
to the understanding of when the rains would come,
when the rains would recede, when they should start moving,
when they should start flowing back.
I mean, valuable information.
If I put you in the desert now,
you wouldn't know what to do.
No.
Whereas you put a person who was
initiated and experienced and learned and observed
what was happening, he would know exactly what to do.
I mean, I've been with Bedouins in Saudi Arabia,
in an environment that is,
that I really wouldn't know what to do.
I wouldn't know which direction to go,
I wouldn't know where to find water, these people know.
And they know because they have studied and observed
and integrated themselves with their environment.
They're part of it.
If our lives are disturbed,
our technological lives that we've laid out for ourselves
where we're dependent on computers
and supermarkets and freeways, were to come to pass
for whatever cataclysmic reason or beyond,
we would not be the ones that would be likely
to survive very well, now would we?
Well, yeah, but more troubling in all this
is that we're handing over
our capacities to machines.
That's what it boils down to.
If there are such thing as the gods,
they must be extremely disappointed
that having provided us
with all these capacities we're
not using them--
And the written word,
and the history passed down as well.
It's a bit like, I see people driving Porsches
and Maseratis, whatever, in this particular area here,
and they're driving it to run by the newspapers
or take their kids to school.
The machine that they have is
totally used without its full capacities.
It's like people buy a digital camera today
with 16 billion pixel whatever
and all sorts of snapshots.
Or you buy a computer that can
perform all sorts of tasks just to write emails.
Well, in a sense, we're the same.
We have an amazing portfolio of capacities,
and it is by using those capacities
that we develop our internal selves
and understand our presence and our existence better.
We're not, and therefore, we're simply existing
in a very low-capacity level.
So turning to the
understandings of the Egyptian past, for example,
and the knowledge that has been left for us,
are you saying that this might be a way
to find ourselves back to the future, so to speak?
Yeah, I believe, one of things that I'm very interested
is not merely to find which small differences
align to which star and so forth.
I'm interested in how
a civilization survived,
in harmony with itself,
with its environment
for 3,000 years until we came and spoiled it.
We have a model that worked, that's what I'm saying,
and we should study it, we should understand why it did so.
And it isn't just the ability to integrate
and live in accordance with the natural environment.
It developed a form of consciousness,
an amazing respect because of its awareness
and its dependency, interdependency of its environment.
For example, it would have been utterly
unthinkable, sacrilege, for the ancient Egyptians
to build a dam on the Nile, which we have done.
By doing that, in order to have
cheaper energy and so forth,
we've disturbed an ecology that
had been in perfect harmony
and people live in perfect harmony with it.
We disturb the cycles of agriculture.
We no longer have natural fertilizers coming from the flood.
We disturbed the ecology of the fauna.
We disturbed even the ecology of the nearby Mediterranean,
which depended on the plankton from the flood of the Nile.
We tampered with nature, we tampered with the powers to be.
Writing's about this: the pharaoh would,
on his crown, on his coronation day,
would take an oath, and he would
the oath would include not to change what he called
the Law of Maat, which we translate as the cosmic order.
In short, he was not to tamper with anything
that was nature orientated.
Not to change the course of the Nile, not to
move hills or whatever.
The other is that he was not going to change the calendar,
what we call the calendar, which to them was
the machine of cosmic cycles, the cosmic order.
This is very interesting because
we live in a environment that is cyclical:
vegetation, life, tides, floods,
all these are cyclical and they're
purely the result of the way this planet moves.
Planet rotates on its axis, it goes around the sun
in a cycle, and it has this wobble
which we call procession.
Because of this, we're in a cyclical environment,
and things return back to the point of origin.
So by not altering a calendrical system,
they believe that the order always return
back to its point of origin, whereas we
form calendars, and by doing so we created
what depression were on in the near time frame,
we're moving forward to god-knows-where,
which isn't true.
Rather than
circular.
Rather than circular
And the result is that we have created
this notion of progress, that we're going ahead
and we have to change things and we have to order things
to quote-unquote "get better."
But the result of this is that
to get better as we perceive it, to improve things,
to make machines faster, to have cell phones that are more--
More ring tones.
More ring tones, whatever.
We grow all this from our natural environment.
For every cell phone that you have,
it is taken literally from the earth
to make the thing.
We're eating up our planet, in simple terms.
Whereas by thinking in cyclical terms
where we are not moving ahead, we're staying
within a cycle, and our job is
to stay in harmony with that cycle.
Which is true, that's what we are.
We're cyclical creatures, we live, we get bored, we die.
We hope to get reborn again, we don't know.
But we are in that cyclical world.
Then our mental process is geared
to think this way, and we let things be.
You're at a point where
you're tired of trying to create dialogue
with the classic Egyptologists; they're not listening.
The world of science, classic science,
isn't listening, and you're ready to...?
Well, there's a problem.
The problem is that, in particular with Egyptology,
is that they have formulated their views
on what ancient Egypt is, and it's so ingrained
in their profession that literally
it's so hard to alter anything that is established.
Like I was saying in the conference,
it's taken months to decide whether
to call something a door or not.
So you can't function in that field,
you're trying to make some progress here.
Well, we've gotta move.
For example, one of the things that has
been a sore point for the last 30 or 40 years is
the so-called star shafts in the Great Pyramid.
Now, I would say that it took about 30 years
to finally get Egyptologists, or at least
a great part of Egyptologists to
recognize them as star shafts.
But even then we still have a hardcore
who keeps on insisting that they're
ventilation and so forth.
The entry that I was mentioning earlier,
there's an encyclopedia being prepared in archeoastronomy.
It's the very first of its kind.
Explain that again.
I think we were off camera when you were talking about it.
The Supreme Council of Antiquities
has commissioned an encyclopedia of archeoastronomy,
one of the commissions.
I think it's going to be published
by the American University Press in Cairo.
They have contacted various archeoastronomers--
there isn't that many in the world, by the way;
it's a new science--
to put entries specifically on Egypt.
One of these experts
is a professor of archeoastronomy.
He founded the first chair of archeoastronomy
in Italy, and he chose the star religion of ancient Egypt,
and mostly it will be about my work.
But he's finally taking a stance of saying,
as far as he's concerned, the star shafts are proven,
those shafts are proven to be star-aligned shafts.
That's it, proven, stop discussion.
The ventilation story is over.
Finito, we're tired of it.
It doesn't work, we're going to put it aside.
It's like this door that has become a world event.
Everybody's aware that there are doors
at the end of these shafts in the Great Pyramid.
The discovery of this is almost from 1993.
I know personally the discoverer.
15 years ago.
14 years ago, to be exact.
Rudolf Gantenbrink, who discovered these doors,
was ready to open them within a week.
We have the technology, there's no problem at all.
And yet, 14 years down the line,
and they're still talking about when and if
they're gonna open them.
This is ridiculous; we can't move.
We're caught in a sort of catatonic
condition here.
I'm taking the matter out of the Egyptological hands.
We're dealing with astronomical monuments,
we're dealing with astronomical texts,
we're dealing with astronomical religion.
We need astronomers.
I'm telling the Egyptologists, enough.
You've had your go, we're bringing in
the big guns in astronomy.
And I'm talking Professor Archie Roy at Glasgow University,
finally these people are coming around
who have moved from classical astronomy
to archeoastronomy, and they realize
that they're the people who have to do it.
When you're dealing with an exact science
like astronomy, an alignment is an alignment.
If you tell an astronomer, there is a temple
or a pyramid, or a road aligned
28 degrees north or east
to the Egyptologists, doesn't mean a thing.
An astronomer immediately knows
that you're talking about the summer solstice, that's it.
The summer solstice, yes.
We're not going to talk 20 years
to arrive at this conclusion.
So in short, what does this mean?
Say the doors are opened, and this is borne out,
that these are star shafts.
We got an amazing situation.
We got the most amazing monument in history,
a universal monument, everybody knows the Great Pyramid,
of which we know absolutely nothing.
We're not sure who built it,
we're not sure when it was built,
we're not sure why it was built,
we're not sure how it was built.
It's an amazing monument that has mystified
and intrigued generations upon generations.
And suddenly we find that within it are those little doors,
and it's the $64,000 question.
Not only they're little doors,
but they're put in a very intriguing place,
a most difficult place within the structure.
Must have been hell to build whatever is there.
A chamber, a box, a room; we don't know, but
we must know--
What's behind
those doors.
What would you say in terms of archeoastronomy
what would you expect to be behind those doors
if they were opened now?
From nothing to the sky's the limit.
(laughter)
I would not wager to guess
because it's just one of those things that
we may have nothing, and we may have everything.
And it may bear out
that we're part of something much larger,
and we're at a time that is critically important.
Funny enough, there's a kind of buzz going on
to do with this site, hence why I'm calling this
"Gathering of Souls," which I'll tell you in a minute.
A lot of people are getting together,
a lot of people who feel that there's something happening.
What exactly I don't know, but--
and it's to do with this place.
There's a kind of message there,
and we haven't quite got it.
So I'm creating a message, if you like,
with the festival I'm doing, which may not be
the exact message, but let's give it a go.
Not just our culture, but throughout historical
context of our civiization, we--
(sneeze)
Excuse me.
Bless you.
Catching one.
We're affected by what I call talismans.
For example, we've been fighting over the last 2,000 years
over a piece of rock on Mount Zion.
Muslims react violently if anything is done
against their icons like the Koran
or the crescent moon or whatever.
We respond to these powerful talismans.
The Great Pyramid is the talisman of this planet.
And if a message is being sent on its behalf,
using it as a talisman, it will be heard worldwide.
People will listen, and this is what I have in mind
is maybe that's what was intended.
It's the only thing that explains the scale, for example.
I mean, it could have been a small pyramid.
But no, they wanted something that you are awed by,
that you really get a kick out of.
So it may be time for us to use that again.
The same way we use various other icons
in our publicity and marketing world,
this is it, but it has to be used properly,
it has to be used very intentionally, people.
I'm gathering as much as I can of these kind of people,
like Graham Hancock, John West, and a variety of others
to send that message.
We desperately need a message.
We desperately need a message that comes
from a wise civilization telling us
something important about ourselves.
We've gotta stop what's happening.
I mean, we really have to.
We're causing a huge mess on this planet.
Gone too far.
We are
in a very, very precarious moment.
We have a clash of civilization building up.
Huge imbalance between east and west.
And we have toys that can cause us a lot of problems.
I'm speaking about nuclear power.
We've got to get
this thing cleared.
We've got to get together and do it,
and it's not our politicians who are doing it.
Like Graham was saying, we are responsible.
Some of us have to do it.
And if it's just sending words,
words have changed the whole world.
In a book that I wrote called Secret Chamber, by the way,
I show how words, just simple words,
the use of words have altered the course of history
and changed the consciousness of the world.
I'm thinking of course of Christ.
I'm thinking of course of Alexander the Great.
I'm thinking of Julius Caesar.
I'm thinking of Napoleon.
I'm thinking of people who have said things with such power
that they've changed the world.
So we need a collective voice now.
A collective voice of wisdom.
We need to get things in what I call critical mass.
People have to get together.
They're spread all over the world,
they're not getting together.
Yes, there are certainly groups,
but we need a message that brings them together,
and we need a place, and I'm calling the place the Sphinx.
Thank you.
Pleasure.
To join Robert on one of his Egyptian field trips
and tune into the secrets of the ancients,
just click on the link below to go to his site.
Meanwhile, if you were intrigued with this information,
you might also enjoy our interviews
with John Anthony West, Graham Hancock, and Robert Schoch.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(swelling string music)